Please Note:       Statement by the Special Rapporteur on the right to adequate housing, Leilani Farha, during the Interactive Dialogue at the Human Rights Council will be referred to as The Report henceforth in my essay.

I agree with financialization of housing. I firmly believe that everyone has the right to not just acquire, but amass wealth by the millions and financialization of housing is a means for people to achieve just that. Financialization of housing, over the years has led to easier liquidation of valuable assets and has given people in need of capital a means of fulfilling it. Taking the example of a business, selling unused office space for a substantial price will give the company capital to invest in R&D and in making a better product, thus improving the lives of the people who are impacted by the product, be it loyal customers or occasional users. There are other real assets as well which are not as easy to liquidize so as to earn huge amounts of capital. According to the Report published by the United Nations Human Rights Council, The value of global real estate is about US$ 217 trillion, nearly 60% of all global assets, with residential real estate comprising 75% of the total.

Thus companies should financialise housing so as to make money and to fuel the economy. Let us take the example of the US. The invention of Mortgage Backed Securities came to fruition in the early 1980s and was one of the important reasons due to which financialization of housing was a huge success… up till 2008. However, the cash flow generated led to rapid improvements in the way of life of a lot of people in the United States. There are also some countries which became prominent by finance, e.g. Singapore. It functions as one of the biggest international financial centers and its presence has become strong these days.

However, financilaisation of housing does not take one important factor into consideration: Housing is a right, not a privilege. Different from other assets, housing is commodity and indispensable assets which all people needs in order to live in dignity and security. Therefore, when we invest in housing, we always must think much of it. The greatest example is the 2008 financial crisis. There are many factors of this crisis, but one of the main reasons why this happened is financialization of housing. There was the bubbles of housing price and many financial institutions such as Lehman Brothers issued lots of subprime mortgages. The increase of housing prices gave ruse to many leading institutions overlooking a huge fallacy when it comes to behavioral economics: if good things happen n times repeatedly then it should also happen the (n+1)th time for no rhyme or reason. People do not like thinking about bad things happening so they assume that the probability of them happening is much less than it actually is.

Let’s be honest we will never be able to eliminate wishful thinking wherein a significant amount of money is at stake. However, social systems should be able to enforce the right of affordable housing to people and take action to those who stand in the way of it.

One example is Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. We must monitor financial institutions and if we detect the potential danger of invading human rights of housing, do something to protect them. Otherwise, subprime mortgages continue to be bought, and some time, the crisis will happen and many people suffer from bailout and become homeless.

There are other examples of balancing the advantage and disadvantage of financialization of housing. According to the Report, the City of Vancouver recently approved a 1% tax, which would apply to both foreign and domestic investors, on vacant homes. The Mayor of London recently announced that builders will be required to ensure that 35% of new homes that are built are genuinely affordable.

To conclude, I definitely agree on financialization of housing because of its ability of stimulation the economy and giving anyone who lacks liquid capital, but has decent accommodations to mortgage, a shrewd mind and a fantastic attitude to earn millions. However, we should also be able to successfully provide as many households as possible the right to affordable housing, wherever in the world they may be.  Human rights is of paramount importance. States, of all thing, have subsidized the excessive financialization of housing at the expense of programs for those in desperate need of housing. It is completely imbalanced. What we must do is to balance the accumulation of capitals by financialization of housing, and, the protection of human rights of housing.
